# Cohabiting

In our individualistic Europe we are not really use to get along with each other. We feel stress and pressure if we don’t find our “own moments” along the day, but ironically, we cannot leave our smartphones when we go to the toilet.

In the current situation, it is likely that your time alone, may either get reduced or expanded. In case you live by yourself, you can likely suffer from loneliness at some point. In case you live with flat mates, and family member, you better learn how to communicate with each other effectively as soon as possible. 

In any case, I encourage you to get in contact with your neighbors in a safe way (2-meter distance, no physical contact, wash hands afterwards, etc…). The more social assets and resources you have around, the more access to potential help you will have in case you need it.

## Get to know yourself

Before venturing out to others, you better get familiar with the person you are. If you haven’t realized it yet, you are the person with whom you will spend your whole life. Getting to know oneself should be something all of us do all over our lives. However, in times of crisis, it is especially important that you put some conscious effort into getting to know the voice in your head, you habits, tendencies, moods, tempers, emotion management, coping mechanisms…

Let’s take it bit by bit. 

### Get in contact with your needs

Different people have different needs. Acknoledge that. In this situation, we are all force to spend whole days locked in one small place. It feels like we are caged animals. We are usually fine with being in cages, but now that it is forced, we feel trapped.

Considering that our needs for fresh air, freedom of movement, and some task to do are heavily reduced, it is fundamental that we enter into contact with our needs in a healthier way. 

Therefore, be aware and conscious of what your body is asking for. If you need to go out because you feel trap at home, consider taking walk on the park on the sunrise, or during the night, when there is no risk of contagion. If your needs asks for human contanct and you feel lonely. Consider spending some days at a friend's place that seems healthy and stable.

Accept your needs and try to fulfill them consciously, minimizing the risks of the situation. It is not possible to go to a bar with many friends, but moving for 3 or 4 days to live with the same friend seems doable for me.

With food, you can try some fasting. Intermitent fasting will make your body more efficient at metabolizing food and it can make your food last longer without negative consequences for you in case things get really, really angry. 

But let's not get too ahead of ourselves yet, and let's talk about current situations. 

### Chronotypes

Your chronotype is the rhythm of your brain along the day. If you feel more awake in the morning, you are and early bird. If you are more awake in the evening, you are an owl. ^[You can learn more reading Daniel Pin’s book [*When: The scientific secrets of perfect timing*](https://www.amazon.com/When-Scientific-Secrets-Perfect-Timing/dp/0735210624) @pink2019scientific]

This is quite important if you are going to share the same space with people with different chronotype than yours. Some people get up filled of energy, some others are angry and slowly until midday. Be aware of what is your case, and understand the differences in others. 

You want to keep things working as smoothly as possible, thus, negotiate your own biological timings. ^[You can also visit my other [guide with life advice](LINKLINKLINK) where I mention the chronotypes.]

### Sleep enough

Your body heals when you sleep. Now that everybody is lock down, there is not much to do. Thus, take your time and rest deeply. Lack of sleep weakens your immune system. Thus, make it difficult for the virus, use the opportunity and catch up with sleep. 

### Time alone

In WEIRD cultures @henrich2010weirdest ^[Western, Educated, Industrialized, Rich, and Democratic] like ours, we are used to have our own private space and personal time. In more collectivistic and developing countries, the story is different. The density of population is so big that people are force to adapt their individualistic impulses to the dynamics of the group. 

In situations like the one we are living, it is a pretty efficient strategy to adopt a "developing country" mindset as soon as possible. We will be together, we will have to share personal and private spaces and resources, and we will be forced to collaborate and sacrifice our personal desired in favour of the collective.

Anyways, if too much cohabiting gets complicate, you can set up a house rule for taking "Time alone". My advice here is that you make it fully "**Time Alone**". I am inspired in the practice of taking one day of *dopamine fasting*, when you are not supposed to eat, socialize, read, use your devices, etc... You can set up a 2 to 3 hours of full time alone, when one person can enter a room without any distraction or devices, so he can focus exclusively on meditating, calming themselves down, write something, exercising, or processing the situation. 

I also advice you to adopt the *silent hour* strategy. 


### Emotional management

We all are going through many emotions at the moment, from fear, panic, nervousness, anger, worriness, boredom, excitement, confusion, surprise...

Thus, it is fundamental that we learn how to remain calm and don't let our emotions take control of the situation. Specially, when spending long periods of time with other people, we need to learn how to release our emotions in a safe way, avoiding aggressivity, but without letting conflicts unresolved. 

Some basic strategies you can already start reading and learning about are: 

- **Meditation**: There is tons of resource on the internet about how to meditate and what are the benefit and impact on psychological and physical health. You can explore a [post I wrote](https://www.carlitofluitoideas.com/meditation-app/) about selecting the most suitable meditaion app depending your previous experecience as meditator, from complete beginner to energy healer. 

- **Emotional intelligence**: [Daniel Goleman](http://www.danielgoleman.info/) is one of the most famous author on the topic. Also, [Mayer and Salovey] are two respected authors within academia that have researched about the topic for many years. You can read and overview of the theory [here](https://www.verywellmind.com/what-is-emotional-intelligence-2795423). 

Basically, you need to train yourself in the four components of emotional intelligence: perceaving emotions, reasoning with emotions, understanding emotions, and managing your emotions. 

Before you get in an argument during the lockdown, breathe deeply, remember your meditation sessions, and perceive, reason, understand and manage what is going on. 

### Habits and tendencies

Different people have different habits. When living together it can get problematic with your flatmates, but the first thing is to know what are your own habits, and in which self-destructive patterns you can fall. When having a lot of free time, you may binge-watch series, or spend the day without doing much, just fooling around your social media. Therefore, the earlier you stablish a series of healthy habits that keep your mind busy and growing the sooner you will enjoy your lockdown time, and the more you will take out of the situation.

I write a post about it on my site, about [my personal habits](www.carlitofluitoideas.com) and how I track them. Take a look if you need some inspiration. Remember, take advantage of this situation. Imagine that you got some free days to invest in yourself, refresh your skills and upgrade your life. 

### Smartphone fear based

Avoid panic mode, go airplane mode. If you are alone at your place watching conspiracy videos, it is likely that you start to get paranoid. You may also receive messages and testimonies from people at other countries, or stories about how is the situation in hospitals. In this cases, the more you use the smartphone, the worse your imagination will become. If you are lockdown at your place and you don't have the virus, the worse thing that can happen to you is loneliness and boredom. If you are alone and you develop sympthoms, then wait few days before heading to the hospitals. It is important to give a chance to your organism to recover by yourself before collapsing healthcare system. 

Additionally, fear and worry will lower down your defenses making you more vulnerable to catch the disease. Thus, shut down your smartphone, or set it up in airplane mode and stablish a *"time for myself"* attitude.

### Hypochondriac

You may start to feel some symptoms at some point. Don’t get hypochondriac and run to the hospitals. If you go to a hospital for mild symptomathology, if you don’t have the virus, you will get it there waiting in emergency. Therefore, try to stay at home, breathe in, breathe out, treat yourself specially good for a couple of days, and wait patiently to see how your situation evolves. If you are young, you may go through the COVID-19 with ease: bit of fever, runny nose, diharrea, and cough. Obviously, if you get worse (short of breathe, high fever), it is probably time to go to the hospital. 

However, try to not get panic for nothing. The more you read about the symptoms, the more your mirror neurons will fire, and the more you brain will remember how many times you sneeze in the last 4 hours. Relax. If you started the lockdown on times, chances are that you are safe. 

Also, it is important to know that catching the virus is not cool, it is dangerous. A health worker [made a video]( https://www.instagram.com/p/B9sFEHzHHqF/?hl=en) where he asks Spanish youth to stay at home and avoid collapsing hospitals for weak symptoms. He implies that some people just go there to “check” if they have the virus to post it on their social media. Please, don’t be stupid. Stay at home, avoid collapsing the hospitals, and spend your time continuing reading this guide. 

### Be creative, keep yourself busy

Use the opportunity to delve in your own creativity. Check the book [*The artist way* by Julia Cameron]( https://juliacameronlive.com/books-by-julia/the-artists-way-a-spiritual-path-to-higher-creativity/) @cameron2016artist. In this book, you will find a series of creative exercises and self-exploration that will keep you busy exploring your own creativity during the lockdown. 

Also, use the occasion to think outside of the box. Creativity sparks with limitations. Creativity is based on new connections of old elements.  Now, that you cannot escape your room, take the opportunity of mixing things up, came up with new ideas, and use develop that artistic passion that you never could. 

### Make a schedule

You need to keep yourself organized. [Jordan Peterson]( https://www.jordanbpeterson.com/) mentions the duality between chaos and order in their works *Maps of meaning* @peterson1999maps and *12 Rules for life* @peterson201812. When there is too much chaos in one’s life, psyches collapse. When they have too much order, people need to fly away. 

In our current situation, it can happen both at the same time. There is too much new chaos in our lives because our plans for March and April got cancelled, and at the same time there is too much order because we cannot escape the environment where we are trapped in. 

Therefore, try to find a balance in between. Use the chaos opportunity to put order and establish a schedule of your day to day of quarantine and use the ordered environment to explore the inner chaos of your psyche, your room, and maybe ending up ordering the world a bit more. 

Furthermore, having and following a schedule will serve as an anchor and guide through your days of quarantine. It is very easy to stop doing things, fall into self-destructive patterns, over-sleeping, compulsive video-gaming, binge-watching, and ending up with a worse life than before. However, if you organize yourself, make a morning routine connecting with your body, your mind, and your long-term working strategy, the quarantine period can become an unforgettable moment of thriving and upgrade of your current life. Use it wisely. 

### Drop individualism

Even if you are alone at home, you should stop thinking as an individual. Here in Europe, we are use to have our own personal time and space, but the current circumstances are asking for something different. Think of yourself as a piece of a huge mechanism. Whatever you do will have an effect on the whole system. Therefore, follow security guidelines, stay at home, avoid hospitals as much as possible, and try to help your flat mates and your neighbors. 

Contrary to what apocalyptic artwork suggest, human beings behave at their best in the worst situations. This brings the best of human nature. The cooperation, kindness, responsibility, solidarity, altruism, and generosity that makes us the ruling specie in the planet. Don’t enter into fear, and let the panic take rule of the situation. Don’t fight over toilet paper on the supermarket and think whether the resources you are taking can help other person more than you. 

Help those in need. If you have grandparent, or elderly in your proximity, offer them shopping and cleaning their house. Keep them as safe as possible. We will survive this all together. Focus on the love, focus on the cooperation, and drop fear, egoism, and individualism. 


## Get to know each other

### Extremelly needed communication

#### Straight forwardness

#### Assume good will and be cooperative

#### Be empathetic

### Express your needs

#### Time alone

- **No smartphone (Dopamine fasting)**

### Be kind

#### Be helpful, prosocial, altruist

#### Respect each other processes


### Negotiation

#### Norms and rules for smooth collaboration

- **Levels of order**

- ** Silent hour**

- **Security word**


## Check with your neighboors


### Make initial contact

### Help them with shooping, errands 

### Avoid isolating elderly


