# Logistics

By now, it is likely that you already have a system about how to do the things you have to do. However, reading this section, you may find some tips and advice to implement to your system, or some new strategies that can improve the efficiency of certain tasks, or bring awareness to new aspects that you didn’t consider before. 

Many of the things I suggest, depends ultimately on your national laws. In countries like Spain, the lockdown doesn’t allow people to go outside home for exercising, while in Belgium or Germany you can go out alone, and even with flat mates. Thus, consider to take my general advice and modify it according to your needs and possibilities. 


## Groceries

As everyone else from our specie, you need food to survive and thrive. Once upon a time, we used to live as nomadic hunter-gathered groups of maximum 150 individuals. Nowadays, we are isolated in our big houses, walking to the supermarket when the hunger appears, and hunting around the shelves, and gathering items in the shopping cart. However, situations like the current lockdown we are living may connect us with a survival instinct that we better acknowledge and control. 

You may start reading [this short article](https://www.weforum.org/agenda/2020/03/supermarkets-grocery-coronavirus-covid19-supply/) to gain a bit of perspective in the whole situation.  

### Non-perishables

First pretty obvious thing that you have likely realized is that there are perishable and non-perishable foods. Perishable foods are the one that gets spoiled after few days, even when it is in the refrigerator. Non-perishable ones those you can forget on the cupboards of your kitchen randomly finding them after months, or even years. 

One thing you should be aware of is that China hasn’t run out of food in the whole time of its lockdown (more than 4 months). Thus, it may be of common sense to think that things are going to be okay if people don’t store half supermarket at their kitchen. I suggest you to buy as you would normally do. Maybe, in a bit bigger quantity, to reduce the trips to the store, but don’t overload yourself. Specially, don’t overload of perishable foods. 

As a wannabe fruitarian (vegan most of the time), fresh fruits and vegetables are my main source of maintenance. Thus, I don’t mind when I arrive to the supermarket and the pasta and bread are finished, but I can get a bit pissed if there is shortage of vegetables. Thus, buy consciously for 3 or 4 days. Think that you will need a excuse to leave your house sooner or later, and going to the supermarket will be a good one.

Just chill down and enjoy the situation. Vulnerable groups are the ones that have to stay at home and take special measures, but if 80% of the cases are going to develop mild flu symptomatology from fighting the virus, you can likely drop panic and focus on thriving. 

If you are concerned, buy some significative amount of non-perishable foods, from grains and seeds (pasta, rice, quinoa, beans), to root vegetables (batata, potato, yuca, beetroot). You can also buy some vegetable milk, and juices. However, I suggest to get non-processed foods as much as possible, since they are the easiest to produce. In case, the factories stop, the supplies that will finish first will be the ones of processed food. Thus, stay simple and safe. Buy the basics and spend some extra-time cooking at home with your loved ones, you will enjoy the process. 

You can also buy some frozen vegetables or frozen them yourself. Consider cleaning up your fridge and freezer before doing so to guarantee that you have enough space for all your shopping. 

If you are an omnivore, I seriously advice you to drop meat. Not only for [the animal suffering]( https://animalequality.org/news/why-factory-farming-is-the-largest-cause-of-animal-abuse-in-history/), [the environmental cost]( https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Environmental_impact_of_meat_production), and the [negative effects to your own health]( https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/26780279); but also because meat consumption is the [origin of many pandemics and diseases]( https://www.aljazeera.com/indepth/interactive/2020/02/deadly-viral-outbreaks-originated-animals-200205173647803.html), and the [antibiotics resistance]( https://www.facebook.com/1743390035906798/videos/639756720177289/) that will make the COVID-19 pandemic look like a cloudy day at the beach. Be serious and be responsible, drop meat, and ditch milk. Going vegan nowadays it is incredibly easy and yummy. Now that you know it, not doing it is an act of selfish hedonism and lack of solidarity with all beings of the planet, you included. 



### Different supermarkets







## Transportation

### Avoid going out

### Walk or cycle

### Cars and motorbike rental


## Garbage management



## Communication 
