# Hygiene and health

We arrive to one of the sections with more information available on the internet. To not be repetitive, I will just share some links and point out to some aspects that may not be mentioned too often in other guides^[If you understand Spanish, [El Pais](https://elpais.com/sociedad/2020/03/13/actualidad/1584102347_992993.html?rel=friso-portada) has several guides that I particularly like.].

Also, my approach to the whole COVID-19 lockdown is to reset and refresh your life, using this whole stand by situation to put some order in your functioning and systems. 

**Minimalism**: As an ADHD, with a limited working memory, and a very distracted mind, I found on minimalism the most efficient and effective relationship with the material world. Actually, one of my hobbies is to visit my friends place and help them deep clean, reorganize, and restructure their relationship with objects^[Yes, I can be a sort of annoying friend. But, does the end justifies the means?].

My approach to minimalism is based on consciousness, self-awareness, and effectiveness. The questions I make to myself when I face an object are: 

-	Do I really need it?

-	How often do I use it?

-	Where is the most logical and efficient place I can put it that is out of sight?

If you want more classical questions?

-	Does it add value?

-	Is it useful?

You can check my [minimalism attempts in the documentary I film in 2018]( https://youtu.be/4lvSzHfc8FU?t=678)^[Later on, I grow more conscious about it, and since I am planning to move to Zambia and growing an eco-community there, I will try to keep it as minimal as possible.]. Therefore, you can use this opportunity to declutter your house and your life, go minimalistic, saving the planet, and start living a more efficient and meaningful life. 

Concerning hygiene, the less things you have, the less you will have to clean, and the cleaner your environment can remain. About the health, a clean environment is less prone to the proliferation of bacteria and germens, and your mind can reach unknown levels of peacefulness and clarity by inhabiting a declutter space. 

## Shopping and home made 

Remember that a good attitude you can develop during the lockdown period is the feeling of living in a developing country. Trying to reduce and minimize as much as possible your consumerist and materialistic behavior; thinking in community terms, instead of as individual; admiring the beauty of being alive, instead of staying busy 24/7. 

### Cleaning products

As you probably have realized with all the amount of free time available with the lockdown, one of the first activities that come to mind is cleaning. 

One of the first thing I did, even before the lockdown started was going to the supermarket and buy all sort of cleaning products and tools. Then, I spent the day with a friend cleaning his bathroom, room, and part of the kitchen. Then, they kick me out of the place. Well, sort of.  

The lesson here is that, the cleaner the environment, the more difficult for viruses and bacteria to dwell and proliferate. Also, you can use the opportunity to make a deep cleaning at your place. I suggest you don’t stop in a superficial cleaning and go object by object deciding how to make your space more efficient, which will take a conscious dose of minimalism. 


### Personal hygiene products

Another thing I recommend shopping are personal hygiene products. With corona or without corona, you are supposed to clean your hands several times a day. However, *corona times require corona measures*. That is why, I bought several pills of soap. If you haven’t switch to **solid soap**, you are filling the planet with plastics unnecessarily and spilling your money. Solid soap is way more long-lasting, and usually comes packaged with one or two sheets of paper. Much better than the hard plastic used to contain liquid soap. Thus, Corona occasion to make the switch. 

- **Toilet paper.** By now, it is likely that most of us have seen empty shelves of toilet paper on the supermarkets. As with the general advice on shopping, chill down, and buy normal amounts. But in the case of toilet paper, I found the whole thing specially ridiculous. If you have travelled to a developing country, usually people shit in a squat position^[I show how in [this video]( https://youtu.be/4lvSzHfc8FU?t=1444)]. After shitting in a latrine, they normally clean their anus with the left hand and some water. Compulsory, they clean both their hands with soap afterwards. You can start adopting this practice today. You will end up cleaner^[did you ever clean shit from your clothes, or hands only with paper, or did you wash it with soap and water?], and save planetary resources, and avoid ridiculous fights over toilet paper on the supermarket. 

### Masks

Since the available amount of free time has been likely increased, it is a good opportunity to google DIY^[Do It Yourself] after any object or operation you may need. 

This way you will save some money during this period of reduced income, and you will be able to fix or make things while the shops are closed. For example, I just Googled [“*Mask DIY*”]( https://www.google.com/search?q=mask+diy&oq=mask+DIY&aqs=chrome.0.0l8.3580j0j7&sourceid=chrome&ie=UTF-8), and I found [this nice tutorial]( https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=N4boLMM4paQ) in YouTube. Masks run out from pharmacies days ago, and it is responsible to leave them for those that need them the most (health care workers, vulnerable populations…). However, why not make your own?

### Pharmacy



### Basic health care


## Basic attitudes 

### Minimalism 

### Communal thinking 

## Social distancing



## Parts of the house 

### Bathroom 

### Kitchen 

- **Freezer**

- **Minimalism**

### Bedrooms 

- **Door knobs**



### Living room and hall 

- **Coats on the hall**

### Quarantine room



### Others

- **Smartphone**


